# Welcome to the DApp Protocols!

Ever since I learned about the technology that drives this "Bitcoin" thing, I've been intrigued. I decided to make it my field of expertise. I was young then; I thought I could use it to make a name for myself. As I grew more experienced with it, I realized that blockchain was so much more than a secure database technology. It was earth shaking. It had the potential to solve problems that have plagued humanity for no less than millennia. It has the potential to balance the use of power in human society.

Yet, in the intermediate years, as I have labored to bring this promise to reality, I have seen that blockchain is not fulfilling this promise. It is seen as a get rich quick scheme, or a mere toy and is not being used nor developed in ways that bring it closer to maximizing its fullest potential.

I quit my job. I sat in a mansion in Acapulco for a year and a half staring at the ocean pondering what had gone wrong. I see others who recognize, as I do, the power of blockchain to organize a better world for everyone, and yet their efforts are uncoordinated and frequently ill-advised. The job isn't getting done.

As I stared out at the sparkling Acapulco Bay, I began to attain clarity. A plan began to form. I began to understand what had gone wrong and how to set it right. I had a vision, and I am going to bring it to reality.

### What are the DApp Protocols?
To understand the DApp Protocols, it is first necessary to understand smart contracts.

### What are Smart Contracts?
To understand smart contracts, it is first necessary to understand blockchains.

### What are Blockchains?
To understand blockchains, it is first necessary to understand human organizational structures.

### What is That, then?
Since their origins, humans have had difficulties. Bad ones. Life is hard. People get hurt. People die. But we all recognize that life could be beautiful, and we strive for that. To deal with the problems, we band together. To band together, we need organization, and that organization comes in two flavors: either we agree upon rules, or we appoint rulers.

Neither approach works well. Agreeing upon rules works great for a minute, but after that, we realize we need to update the rules. So we agree on new rules. That gets us by for a while, but as the organization scales and members direct their focus elsewhere and individual needs change in different ways, it becomes infeasible to agree on new rules that work for everyone.

It's also messy: agreeing on rules is one thing, but enforcing them is another. People get assigned to that, and that works well sometimes, but then those people need to organize themselves, which creates the same problem all over again. And then there's that whole issue of interpreting the rules, when ambiguities arise.

The long and short of it is, agreeing upon rules hasn't worked well for us. We try to do it, but it's complicated, and so we end up appointing people to work on updating the rules, others to work on interpreting the rules, and still others to work on enforcing the rules. So far, agreeing upon rules is just a convoluted way of appointing de-facto rulers.

If there's one thing history has taught us, it's that appointing rulers is even worse than agreeing upon rules.

Before we can understand blockchains, we need to understand one key concept: so far, we've talked about appointing rulers or agreeing upon rules as the two possibilities for human organization. Now let's adopt a more analytical nomenclature. The two strategies for human organization are centralization or decentralization, and so far, we haven't been happy with centralization, but we haven't been successful at decentralization. From this perspective, we can look at history and consider that, for quite a long time, human society has been striving to successfully achieve decentralized organization, but we haven't quite made it work.

### What is Blockchain?
Blockchain is humanity's latest attempt at decentralized organization. I think it's the first one that can work sustainably.

In more practical terms, blockchain is a decentralized database based upon a carefully analyzed system of rules (a protocol) governing how that database can be updated. Blockchains come in two main flavors: public and private. A public blockchain's rules must be perfectly balanced to give no special recognition to any individual user or group, and to ensure that the system cannot be subverted to favor any particular interest. A private blockchain's rules are defined arbitrarily to serve some individual interest, and can be updated at any time. A private blockchain is simpler than a public blockchain, and is really no more than a cleverly durable accounting system. In this discussion, we are primarily focused on public blockchains.

A key point of public blockchains is that they are open access systems. Anyone with the computing and connectivity capabilities can join at any time without seeking any sort of permission or authorization from any party, and the system gives no advantage to any party over any other. It should be observed that, of the extant blockchains, only the classical Proof of Work chains, such as Bitcoin, are fully public blockchains. Proof of Stake blockchains are only semi-public, as in order to transact on such chains, stake must be acquired from someone who has it, and initially, only the founders of the chain have stake. If we suppose, however, that stake is available to the public via markets and exchanges, then we can contemplate Proof of Stake blockchains as public blockchains. Nevertheless, I would like to create a more ideal consensus protocol at some point that rectifies this weakness.

So far, we have discussed only the mechanisms on which blockchains operate, but not what they do. What a blockchain does is to effectively define a consensus-controlled, decentralized computer. A modern computer does little to nothing useful without software, however, so now we turn our attention to the software that blockchains run.

### What is a Smart Contract?
A smart contract is the program that a blockchain runs. It is the code which defines features that are relevant and interesting to people, and defines the rules by which those features are used. For example, a smart contract may define a currency token which may be transferred between balances. Another smart contract may define contests or polls which voters may cast votes in to determine a winner.

Any functionality of a blockchain which is of interest or relevance to people is a smart contract. All blockchains are decentralized computers, and the programs they run are smart contracts. This is true even of classical blockchains like Bitcoin, although the program and the computer were so closely coupled that, at the time, we didn't necessarily distinguish between them.

The next thing to understand about blockchains and smart contracts is that they are back-ends. They run on servers, not user devices, and this is necessarily so because the blockchain is a persistent, ongoing computation, and user devices do not have continuous connectivity, power, or processing capacity to dedicate to maintaining their synchronization with the network at large. As a result, dedicated servers are necessary to participate in the network, thus creating the decentralized computer that is the blockchain. An implication of this is that blockchains and smart contracts alone are insufficient to define a decentralized application, or DApp. With this in mind, we can now consider what is a dapp, and what are the DApp Protocols.

### What are the DApp Protocols?
The DApp Protocols are a set of specifications and software with the goal of bridging the gap between smart contracts and the people they exist to serve. Blockchains and smart contracts alike were conceived as a decentralized solution to the problems of social organization structures; however, thus far the only full applications we have observed for blockchains and smart contracts are based on traditional, centralized infrastructures such as the web and app stores. The trouble with this is that we use blockchains to solve the problems created by centralized solutions. If we rely on centralized solutions to connect the blockchains to the people they exist to serve, we leave those people detached from the decentralized system, able to interact directly with only a centralized system, and all centralized systems are vulnerable to being destabilized, whether by malice or incompetence, and leaving the people they were intended to serve with the exact same problems we have already examined.

The goal of the DApp Protocols is, then, to establish a decentralized infrastructure for defining dapps as user-facing application code and assets, conveying these dapps from their creators to their users, evaluating and rendering these dapps on user devices, and supporting the dapps' operations as they interact with the blockchain and with other users. The goal is to accomplish this using decentralized technologies and relying solely on measured and distributed trust, ensuring that the entire process is conducted so that the dapps and their operations are secured to a standard that meets or exceeds that set by the decentralized back-ends themselves. Furthermore, the goal is to do this in such a way that the dapps are intuitive and convenient to their users, while simultaneously being developer-friendly and maintainable, to a vastly higher standard than has been seen in the computing world thus far.

### What is the Status of their Development?
The DApp Protocols have been planned thoroughly. Those plans, however, exist primarily in my mind, and documenting them is a work to which I have been unable to dedicate significant resources. I have been working alone, and thus, implementation has been more valuable than documentation. The plans are now stable enough, however, that it is time to begin bringing more people onto the project, and thus, documentation is becoming a higher priority, and the first priority there is to document the work that has been done so far and the plans for the next steps.

The beginning of the DApp Protocols is at the foundation, which is the back-end. As mentioned earlier, only Proof of Work blockchains are truly public; however, they are secured by the randomness of computing a proof of computational work. This limits these blockchains' consensus models, as their organizing principle is randomness, not cooperation or intent. As a result, the blockchain performance is unreliable and unstable, as are the blockchain fees and responsiveness. These chains are unsuitable as a basis of development for the DApp Protocols due to their unpredictability. Furthermore, classical blockchains such as Bitcoin, and even Turing complete smart contract chains such as Ethereum, do not have a sufficiently powerful or expressive database technology to make for intuitive software development, neither for the back-end nor a front end, which in turn leads to software which is not applicable to real-life complexity nor is understandable to people. As a result, the Graphene family of Proof of Stake blockchains has been selected as the initial development ground for the DApp Protocols, due to their powerful and performant databases and reliable performance.

It is recognized, however, that no existing blockchain is yet ideal, and furthermore, that tying the DApp Protocols to any particular blockchain or family of blockchains would be myopic. Eventually, the Protocols must be usable with any blockchain, including future blockchains which approach closer to the ideals of a reliably performant and intuitive public blockchain. For this reason, and others, the foundation of the DApp Protocols is not a specific blockchain, but rather, an abstraction layer which separates the smart contracts from the underlying blockchain technology, allowing a smart contract code implementation to be ported from one blockchain or type of chain to another. In this way, we enable contracts built for use with the DApp Protocols to move in the future, whether to the better-known classical blockchains, or to ideal blockchains yet to be developed. A further advantage of this back-end portability is that it gives communities a technological solution for moving a dapp from one chain to another if the consensus of their original chain moves in a way contrary to the ethos of the dapp -- a situation which has caused many blockchains to fork already.

Therefore, the beginning of the DApp Protocols is a Blockchain Abstraction Layer, or the BAL. The BAL project was sponsored by the Peerplays blockchain and supported by Follow My Vote, and provides a layer upon which smart contracts can be developed and compiled to run on either the EOSIO blockchain or the Peerplays blockchain. Support for other blockchains can be added in the future. Readers may learn more about the BAL in [its repo](https://github.com/dapp-protocols/blockchain-abstraction-layer).

### What comes next?
The BAL provides the foundation for development of dapp back-ends, but a foundation alone is not a building. The eventual vision for the DApp Protocols is to define the DApp Browser, a portal application which is installed on user devices and which locates and connects to blockchain nodes to discover dapps and, using distributed trust, to fetch and validate these dapps, render them to the user, and support the dapp's operations as the user uses it to interact with the virtual world.

To bring this vision to fruition, the browser must be developed in conjunction with a DApp Network, which provides discoverability of nodes and services in the network, based on technology to automatically balance and maintain the network to maximize performance and integrity as nodes join and leave, and to provide connectivity between all nodes, even when firewalls or NATs necessitate indirect connectivity.

I have plans for all of these components, and I can assure that they are practically possible. Building them will take time, however, and I do not plan to do it alone. I welcome help in bringing this technology to the world.

At present, efforts are dedicated to maintaining and improving the BAL, while also looking forward to the middleware and front-end concerns. The browser and network are platform technologies which should support all possible kinds of dapps and provide rigorous implementations of the common needs of dapps. To determine how to meet these needs, I am working with Follow My Vote to create a polling dapp, which will serve as the guiding example of what a highly intuitive and supportable commercial dapp can look like. From that archetype, I will derive the necessary technologies to support dapps in general, and integrate them into a complete solution including the browser, the network, and the other technologies and nodes that will support the decentralized ecosystems. This guiding principal dapp is named Pollaris, and can be found in the Follow My Vote repositories for the [contract](https://github.com/FollowMyVote/pollaris-contract) and [GUI](https://github.com/FollowMyVote/pollaris-gui).

Thank you for joining me on this journey. I look forward to seeing your contributions!
